[Go] Document logs (#4463)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/languages/go/instrumentation.md

## Logs

Logs are distinct from metrics and traces in that **there is no user-facing
OpenTelemetry logs API**. Instead, there is tooling to bridge logs from existing
popular log packages (e.g. slog, logrus, zap, logr) into the OpenTelemetry
ecosystem. For rationale behind this design decision, see
[Logging specification](/docs/specs/otel/logs/).

The two typical workflows discussed below each cater to different application
requirements.

> ### Direct to collector (Experimental)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Direct to Collector (experimental)
```

Author: Same is in other places. Should I fix it as well?

Author: I am not sure if this is a good proposal. E.g.
- https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/resource/
- https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/go/exporters/

Author: I created https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/4488 to track this.

> In the direct to collector workflow, logs are emitted directly from an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the direct-to-Collector workflow, logs are emitted directly from an
```

Author: Same is in Java. Should I fix it there as well?

Author: Shouldn't the header be also named "direct-to-Collector", then?

Reviewer 2: Yes, there should be something consistent

application to a collector using a network protocol (e.g. OTLP). This workflow
is simple to set up as it doesn't require any additional log forwarding
components, and allows an application to easily emit structured logs that
conform to the [log data model][log data model]. However, the overhead required
for applications to queue and export logs to a network location may not be
suitable for all applications.

To use this workflow:

- Configure the OpenTelemetry [Log SDK](#logs-sdk-experimental) to export log
  records to desired target destination (the
  [collector][opentelemetry collector] or other).
- Use an appropriate [Log Bridge](#log-bridge-experimental).

> #### Logs SDK (Experimental)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Logs SDK (experimental)
```

Reviewer: Same comment as above:

- Add an explicit has ID (**here and for other headings**), for example: `{#logs-sdk}`
- Move the status mention into the section prose, and then you can link to the spec definition of the term, for example:

  ```markdown
  #### Logs SDK
  
  **Status**: [Experimental](/docs/specs/otel/document-status/)
  ```

  Or only keep the "Status" in the top-level "Direct-to-Collector" section's opening paragraph?

Author: > only keep the "Status" in the top-level "Direct-to-Collector" section's opening paragraph?

I like this. See: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/4463/commits/6f3bc5ec289df4d07aa1504e24a10f4a91324c5b

Reviewer: Yes, perfect, if that what you prefer. 👍🏻

	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	// Handle shutdown properly so nothing leaks.
	defer func() {
		if err := loggerProvider.Shutdown(ctx); err != nil {
			fmt.Println(err)
		}
	}()

	// Register as global logger provider so that it can be accessed global.LoggerProvider.
	// Most log bridges use the global logger provider as default.
	// If the global logger provider is not set then a no-op implementation
	// is used, which fails to generate data.
	global.SetLoggerProvider(loggerProvider)
}

func newResource() (*resource.Resource, error) {
	return resource.Merge(resource.Default(),
		resource.NewWithAttributes(semconv.SchemaURL,
			semconv.ServiceName("my-service"),
			semconv.ServiceVersion("0.1.0"),
		))
}

func newLoggerProvider(ctx context.Context, res *resource.Resource) (*log.LoggerProvider, error) {
	exporter, err := otlploghttp.New(ctx)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	processor := log.NewBatchProcessor(exporter)
	provider := log.NewLoggerProvider(
		log.WithResource(res),
		log.WithProcessor(processor),
	)
	return provider, nil
}
```

Now that a `LoggerProvider` is configured, you can use it to set up a
[Log Bridge](#log-bridge-experimental).

> #### Log Bridge (Experimental)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Log Bridge (experimental)
```

A log bridge is a component that bridges logs from an existing log package into
the OpenTelemetry [Log SDK](#logs-sdk-experimental) using the [Logs Bridge
API][logs bridge API]. Log bridges are available for various popular Go log
packages:

> - [slog bridge][`go.opentelemetry.io/contrib/bridges/otelslog`]

Reviewer: Is there more than one? If you only want to give this one as an example, I'd suggest not putting it in a list, or at least adding "for example:".

Author: There will be more 😉 

E.g.
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/pull/5356
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/pull/5357

I wanted to preserve the consistency with Java.

> - [slog bridge][`go.opentelemetry.io/contrib/bridges/otelslog`]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [slog bridge][otelslog]
```

## Logs

Logs are distinct from metrics and traces in that **there is no user-facing
OpenTelemetry logs API**. Instead, there is tooling to bridge logs from existing
popular log packages (such as slog, logrus, zap, logr) into the OpenTelemetry
ecosystem. For rationale behind this design decision, see
[Logging specification](/docs/specs/otel/logs/).

The two typical workflows discussed below each cater to different application
requirements.

> ### Direct-to-Collector (Experimental)

Reviewer: Btw, once this section looses its experimental status, the hash IDs to the section will become invalid. I have two alternative suggestions:

1. Move the status mention into the section prose, and then you can link to the spec definition of the term, for example:

    ```markdown
    ### Direct-to-Collector
    
    **Status**: [Experimental](/docs/specs/otel/document-status/)
    ```

2. Add an explicit has ID (**here and for other headings**), for example: `{#direct-to-collector}`

## Logs

Logs are distinct from metrics and traces in that **there is no user-facing
OpenTelemetry logs API**. Instead, there is tooling to bridge logs from existing

> popular log packages (e.g. slog, logrus, zap, logr) into the OpenTelemetry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
popular log packages (such as slog, logrus, zap, logr) into the OpenTelemetry
```

Author: Same is in Java. Should I fix it there as well?

Reviewer 2: yes, if you want to, but in a separate PR.

[opentelemetry specification]: /docs/specs/otel/
[trace semantic conventions]: /docs/specs/semconv/general/trace/
[instrumentation library]: ../libraries/
[opentelemetry collector]:
  https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector
[logs bridge API]: /docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api
[log data model]: /docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model

> [`go.opentelemetry.io/contrib/bridges/otelslog`]:
>   https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/contrib/bridges/otelslog

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[otelslog]: https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/contrib/bridges/otelslog
```
